mind your decisions I am Prestel Walker
in square ABCD E is the midpoint of AD
construct a circle between the three
points II B and C which shape has the
larger perimeter the square or the
circle I saw this problem on math Stack
Exchange it was described as a
surprisingly hard problem for high
school students pause if you'd like to
give this problem a try and when you're
ready keep watching to learn how to
solve this problem
[Music]
I'm going to present three different
ways to solve this problem let's get
started with the intersecting chords
theorem to begin we'll construct the
perpendicular bisector of the top side
of the square
since point E this top point is tangent
to the circle this perpendicular
bisector is a diameter of the circle
it also bisects the bottom side of the
square so this length is equal to Y this
length will also be equal to Y and the
entire site of the square will be equal
to 2y if we write R for the radius of
the circle then 2r is the diameter of
the circle and the remaining distance on
the diameter is equal to 2r minus 2y now
we can use the intersecting chords
theorem we must have 2y x 2 R minus 2y
is equal to Y multiplied by Y let's
simplify this equation we'll first
distribute and then we'll group like
terms
well then factor Y and we can then solve
this equation y is either equal to 0 or
Y is equal to 4/5 R since we want Y to
be a positive value so the square side
has a positive length we reject Y is
equal to 0 therefore Y is equal to 4/5 R
which means R is equal to 5 over 4y
let's now calculate the squares
perimeter the side of the square is
equal to 2y which means the perimeter is
equal to 4 x 2y which is equal to 8 Y
now let's calculate the circles
perimeter or its circumference that'll
be equal to 2 pi R now R is equal to 5
over 4 multiplied by Y which means 2 pi
R is equal to 5 PI over 2 x y and this
is approximately equal to 7 point 8 5 y
which is definitely less than 8 y
therefore the square has the larger
perimeter
now let's proceed to the next method
which uses a property of right triangles
we'll proceed like method one where we
have the perpendicular bisector notice
this will also be perpendicular on this
side of the square will label the
lengths as before and now if this is the
center of the circle this length will be
equal to R and this length will also be
a radius of the circle now this distance
is equal to X what must X be equal to
well we want the entire side of the
square to be equal to 2y therefore we
must have X plus R is equal to 2y which
means X is equal to 2y minus R we now
consider this right triangle by the Gogu
theorem we have 2y minus R the quantity
squared plus y squared is equal to R
squared we can then simplify this
equation and just like before we end up
with a very similar equation we have two
possibilities and we reject Y is equal
to 0 and this proceeds just like before
where we calculate the perimeter of the
square and the circle and we're going to
get that the squares perimeter is going
to be larger than the circles perimeter
now under method 3 using similar
triangles let's construct the following
chords of the circle we have this chord
and this chord now this entire triangle
will have an angle that's inscribed in a
semicircle therefore this is a right
angle
now that means this is an altitude on
the hypotenuse of this right triangle
therefore it divides this right triangle
into two similar triangles this is the
larger right triangle and it has a ratio
of its short leg to its long leg equal
to 1 over 2 that's why / - why this will
be similar to this right triangle which
must have the same ratio in this
triangle the longer leg is equal to Y so
the shorter leg must be equal to Y over
2 to get a ratio of 1 over 2 we now have
R is the radius which means that - R is
equal to 2 y plus y over 2 we then have
R is equal to 5
over 4y which means just as before we
calculate the squares perimeter and the
circles perimeter and we're going to get
that the squares perimeter is larger I
know there are many other ways to solve
this problem it's a really fun one do
check out the thread on math Stack
Exchange and you can share your
solutions over there thanks for making
mind your decisions one of the best
channels on YouTube as always thanks for
watching and thanks for your support
[Music]